Long term uncontrolled sugars can lead to complications such as decreased vision, kidney failure and heart attacks.
Diet: Regular and consistent diet is most important, with no feasts and fasts. Split your diet into 3-4 meals. Avoid sugar and sugar containing foods, and fried foods. Avoid fats (butter,oil, malai) and fat rich foods (puri, paratha, chat, namkeen etc.). Drink cows milk or toned milk, not buffalo milk.
It is important to have good control of diabetes, and to treat high blood pressure, normalize body weight, do regular exercise and stop smoking.
Exercise: Daily exercise is very important (for at least 30-45 minutes/day). You can exercise at any time of the day. Brisk walking is equally useful as more vigorous exercises.
Medicines: Tablets prescribed by your doctor for diabetes control must be taken half an hour before meal. Do not forget to take meal after taking tablets, otherwise you may have a low blood sugar reaction.
Insulin: Almost 50% of patients of type 2 diabetes will require insulin after 10 years. For being able to use insulin properly, you need to have some extra knowledge. You must arrange 2 or 3 meetings with our Diabetes Educator to learn how to use insulin properly.
What is good blood sugar control: Ideally, your blood sugar should be between 80 to 120 mg% fasting or before meals. Two hours after any meal, it should be below 180mg%. Another very good test, which measures average sugar control over the previous 3 months, is called glycosylated haemoglobin or HbA1c. This is 4-6% in people without diabetes. Patients should try to keep it 6-7% or at the most 8%.
Checkups: When you are diagnosed to have diabetes, you must have the following checkups, in addition to the full check up by the doctor or diabetes nurse (including blood pressure and feet examination) annually. a. Eye check up by retina specialist; b. Blood fats (cholestrol etc); c. Urine microalbumin, serum creatinine (kidney function tests); d. ECG (elecrocardiogram). If these are normal, you must repeat these checkups once a year in the future.