In type 1 diabetes, the body makes either very little or no insulin, an essential hormone. For this reason, anyone with type 1 diabetes needs to take insulin every day. This is why your health care provider prescribed a long-acting, injectable insulin as part of a diabetes treatment plan.
Type 1 diabetes requires daily management and care. But don’t be overwhelmed!
A person with type 1 diabetes can’t make the insulin their body needs. And without insulin, the sugar in their blood can’t get into the cells where it’s needed. Instead, the sugar stays in their blood and creates ‘high blood sugar’. It can even build to dangerous levels, which can cause serious problems. To replace the insulin their body doesn’t make, a person with type 1 diabetes needs to take insulin every day.
At first, managing type 1 diabetes can seem like a whole extra layer of work. But type 1 diabetes doesn’t have to be overwhelming. Caring for it includes 4 basic steps. These are: 1) Healthy Eating. 2) Being Active. 3) Taking Insulin. 4) Tracking Blood Sugar.
Healthy eating are the same for people with type 1 diabetes as they are for everyone. Here are some tips: 1) Eat regularly, without skipping meals, making sure to track the number of carbohydrates (carbs) eaten during the day (we’ll explain carbs at right). 2) Trim the fats by choosing low-fat foods, such as fresh fruit, roasted chicken, or baked fish. 3) Avoid salty snacks, and leave the salt shaker alone.
For someone with type 1 diabetes, healthy eating is all about counting. Reading food nutrition labels can help count: 1) Carbohydrate grams (carbs). 2) Fat grams. 3) Sodium milligrams (salt). Knowing the numbers of carbs in food is important, since carbs tend to raise blood sugar more than other types of food.
When someone with type 1 diabetes is physically active, their blood sugar is lowered, so they’ll need to take less insulin (or eat more to balance it out). For this reason, be sure to speak with your health care provider about how physical activity can impact a diabetes treatment plan. Here are some important points to remember: Play it safe. Keep it fun. Check blood sugar. Keep high-sugar “emergency carbs” close at hand.
Play it safe. Be sure to check with your diabetes care team before starting any physical activity or switching to a new activity.
Keep it fun. Choosing a physical activity that’s enjoyable is a great way to start. If nothing comes to mind, running or dancing can be good ways to get going.
Check blood sugar. Before starting any physical activity, it’s important to take a blood sugar reading, and avoid getting started if the blood sugar reading is too low (less than 100 mg/dL) or too high (more than 250 mg/dL). 
Keep in mind, though, blood sugar levels can continue to drop 16 to 24 hours after doing physical activity, since the body is still using the sugar in the blood to replace the sugar used by muscles.
Keep high-sugar “emergency carbs” close at hand. These can come from fruit juice, glucose tablets, raisins, or hard candies.
Be sure to speak with your health care provider about what to do if blood sugar gets too high or too low. And always follow your health care provider’s instructions.
When someone has type 1 diabetes, their body can’t produce the insulin it needs on its own. This is why they need to take insulin by pump or injections every day. Your health care provider prescribed a long-acting insulin, as well as a fast-acting mealtime insulin. Taking these 2 insulins as instructed can help keep blood sugar in check.
Since it’s inside the body, blood sugar isn’t always something that can be “seen”. And it’s not always something that can be “felt”. Checking and tracking blood sugar every day is the only sure way to know how blood sugar is doing, and whether any changes need to be made to the diabetes care plan.
Testing with a blood sugar meter can show how much sugar is in the blood at a particular time. Since food and activity can affect blood sugar levels, blood sugar may need to be checked several times a day.
Blood sugar numbers can be tracked in a diary. We suggest using this one.
When learning about type 1 diabetes, you’ll often hear the term ‘A1C’, which is a measurement of average blood sugar level over 3 months. An ‘A1C test’ is done at a health care provider’s office. Anyone who has diabetes will have an ‘A1C goal’. This number comes from a person’s health care provider.
According to the American Diabetes Association (ADA), anyone younger than 18 years of age should aim for an A1C of less than 7.5%. If A1C is higher than goal, the diabetes treatment plan may need to be adjusted.
When ‘glucose’ (blood sugar) enters red blood cells, it links with ‘hemoglobin’ (a protein inside the cells) and becomes ‘hemoglobin A1C’, or simply, ‘A1C’. Red blood cells live about 3 months, so A1C is typically checked every 3 months; this reading is like a “snapshot” of blood sugar levels over that period of time.
If your child was diagnosed with type 1 diabetes, you need to know—and help your child understand—there’s no way to “prevent” type 1 diabetes... it just happens. But, there is hope in taking the right kinds of action to care for it.
Instead of letting the future seem overwhelming, you can help an older child understand the control they could have over their care. And your presence can reassure a child of any age that they are not alone. With acceptance comes positivity—and strength.
Managing type 1 diabetes is an everyday process. It can seem overwhelming at first, for parent and child alike. As you care for your child, stressing the positives can go a long way toward helping them feel okay with their condition.
Discuss type 1 diabetes. Oftentimes, the best way to accept something is to discuss it openly. When done together, between you and your child, this can be an exercise in communication. You can also start a conversation about type 1 diabetes with your family, and extend it to your friends. And ultimately, your community.
Spend time together. Blood sugar checks and taking insulin can coincide with regularly scheduled “together times”, such as watching movies, doing projects, playing games, or even playing sports.
Establish a healthy diet. This can be the start of eating—even cooking—healthy foods together; after all, the roots of bonding are often planted in the kitchen and at the dinner table. Nurturing a close relationship with your child is important.
Talking to friends about your diabetes might even help. You can tell them how you would feel if you had low or high blood sugar, and explain what they could do if you have an emergency.
If you have type 1 diabetes and you’ve already started driving, there are certain things you’ll need to do. Before you get behind the wheel: Always check your blood sugar before getting into the car. If your blood sugar isn’t within your target range, don’t drive! Pay attention to how you feel. If you feel any symptoms of low blood sugar, pull over immediately! Avoid eating while driving, as eating can affect your blood sugar while you’re on the road, as well as distract your attention.
Even with type 1 diabetes, you can hang out with your friends and go to parties. You’ll just need to do some pre-party planning before you go. Speak to your friend, to make sure they know you have type 1 diabetes. If you need help checking your blood sugar or taking your insulin, be sure to ask your parents to show your friend’s parents what to do. And, it’s definitely a good idea to let them know how to use emergency medicine—called glucagon—in case you get low blood sugar, and for you to carry glucagon with you at all times.
For hyperglycemia check your blood sugar levels and watch out for physical symptoms, such as: Feeling very thirsty. Going to the bathroom to pee more than usual. Feeling very hungry. Feeling sleepy. Blurry vision.
Hypoglycemia (below 70 mg%) can occur with or without symptoms. Be sure to regularly check your child’s blood sugar. Some symptoms are: Feeling shaky, Feeling sweaty, Feeling dizzy, Feeling weak or tired, Feeling nervous or upset, Feeling very hungry, Headaches Changes in mood or behavior.
Consider to prepare a diabetes emergency kit : Important medications such as insulin, insulin delivery supplies, and oral medications (remember to refrigerate insulin as needed, and always check expiration dates). Fast-acting carbs to counter blood sugar lows. Basic supplies for checking, such as lancets and test strips. A spare blood sugar meter, with extra batteries. Glucagon for emergency lows. A written list of emergency contacts (since a battery failure or power outage can affect  your mobile phone).
What is good blood sugar control: Ideally, your blood sugar should be between 80 to 120 mg% fasting or before meals. Two hours after any meal, it should be below 180mg%. Another very good test, which measures average sugar control over the previous 3 months, is called glycosylated haemoglobin or HbA1c. This is 4-6% in people without diabetes. Patients should try to keep it 6-7% or at the most 8%. 
Checkups: When you are diagnosed to have diabetes, you must have the following checkups, in addition to the full check up by the doctor or diabetes nurse (including blood pressure and feet examination) annually. a. Eye check up by retina specialist; b. Blood fats (cholestrol etc); c. Urine microalbumin, serum creatinine (kidney function tests); d. ECG (elecrocardiogram). If these are normal, you must repeat these checkups once a year in the future.  